# SILLYCON XX1

Perhaps the most recent addition to the suit of consumables,
that we, as citizens of the 21st century, devour, is digital content.
Digital content—posts, stories, comments—might meaningfully be juxtaposed aginst analog content like film, music, photography, and the likes. These analog counterparts do have avenues for digital consumption, but they were concieved in an anlog world, and thus the constrinats under which the traditions of these forms of media developed, were shaped by a differnt world. The seperation between pieces of traditional content—or "works" as they more pompuously might be described as—is starker than there new, digital counterparts. The piece with which the median content creator of the 20st century contributed to the culture was bigger than it is now. Certainly, the barrier to entry for publication is lower. The term "publish" as abundantly intergrated in modern content platform user interface code bases. Any one might sign up for service in which they can use these buttons. A version of this idea often, with some merit, characterises this as a democratization of sorts. This is a quantiative claim, in that it is a claim amount the fraction of people that have access to a particular service. Democratization is a nice word, and many changes that have been characterised as such are controversial to critisese. But, merely stating that a democratization has taken place, declaring it good, and leaving it at that is a disservice to thought. So; what is the effect of this democratization.

## Information

If one were to attribute the arrival of this new digital age to one person, it would be that of Claude Shannon. With his seminal paper on the Mathematics of Communication he birthed our new world. It is perhaps the only example in science, of field being born with one paper alone. The most similar example that comes to mind, we have to look towards 19th century French literature, and Houysmann's á Rebour, or Against Nature as it is sometimes titled in English. Here Houysmanns managed to, as an author whose name I now forget said, both end naturalism, userhing in a new age of postnaturalism, and end that too—all with the same book. But I digress, these pages are about SillyCon XX1, a place of characterological assymetries.